README.md, before:

<img align="left" width="80" alt="Toylang" src="./icon.png">
<h1>Toylang</h1>

A toy language which compiles to rust for fun and experimentation.

See also work in progress [VS Code Extension](https://github.com/Swiftaff/toylang-vscode)

## Build

Builds the `'/src/main.rs` into an executable at `/target/debug/toylang.exe` or `/target/release/toylang.exe`

```
cargo build
```

or

```
cargo build --release
```

## Usage

Create a file e.g. `test.toy` containing the toy language in the same directory (or elsewhere). Pass the filepath to the exe to compile it:

```
toylang test.toy
```

or

```
toylang.exe ../../somewhere/else/test.toy
```

Compile errors will appear in the console.

```
TOYLANG COMPILE ERROR:
----------
= monkey monkeys
         ^^^^^^^ is not a valid expression: must be either an: integer, e.g. 12345, float, e.g. 123.45, existing constant, e.g. x, string, e.g. "string", function, e.g. + 1 2
----------
= monkey monkeys
^ No valid expression was found
----------
```

Or on success a compiled file will be saved.
By default we assume the toylang.exe is in the `/target/debug` or /`target/release` directory, so it will save the output into `../../src/bin/output.rs`

You can then build THAT file with cargo as needed, i.e. add this to the "Cargo.toml"

```
[[bin]]
name = "output"
```

Then compile and run the output file

```
cargo run --bin output
```

or

```
cargo run --release --bin output
```

And your final compiled `output.exe` will be run from `/target/debug` or `/target/release`

## Toy language Syntax Examples

### Hello, world

<table><tr><th>Toy</th><th>Rust</th></tr><tr><td>

```
// print
@ "Hello, world!"
@ 1
@ 1.23


```

</td><td>

```rust
fn main() {
    // print
    println!("{}", "Hello, world!".to_string());
    println!("{}", 1);
    println!("{}", 1.23);
}
```

</td></tr></table>

### Constant assignment

<table><tr><th>Toy</th><th>Rust</th></tr><tr><td>

```

// single line comments
// assign values to constants
= an_integer 123
= a_float 123.45
= a_reference an_integer
= a_string "string"

// basic arithmetic built in functions
= addition + 1 2
= subtraction - 5.4 3.2
= multiplication * 3 4
= division / 1.0 2.0
= modulus % 42.0 3.14

// booleans and equality
= is_true true
= is_false false
// the below constants are all assigned the value true
= equal == 1 1
= not_equal != 1 2
= greater_than > 2 1
= less_than < 1 2
= gte >= 2 1
= lte <= 1 2

// if expressions
= a ? true "true" "false"
= b ? is_true "true" "false"
= c ? < 1 2 "true" "false"

= get_true \ bool => true
= d ? get_true "true" "false"




= get_truer \ i64 bool arg1 => > arg1 5
= e ? get_truer 10 "true" "false"


= get_more_true \ i64 i64 i64 bool arg1 arg2 arg3 =>
  < + arg1 + arg2 arg3 10
= f ? get_more_true 1 2 3 "true" "false"


```

</td><td>

```rust
fn main() {
    // single line comments
    // assign values to constants
    let an_integer: i64 = 123;
    let a_float: f64 = 123.45;
    let a_reference: i64 = an_integer;
    let a_string: String = "string".to_string();

    // basic arithmetic built in functions
    let addition: i64 = 1 + 2;
    let subtraction: f64 = 5.4 - 3.2;
    let multiplication: i64 = 3 * 4;
    let division: f64 = 1.0 / 2.0;
    let modulus: f64 = 42.0 % 3.14;

    // booleans and equality
    let is_true: bool = true;
    let is_false: bool = false;
    // the below constants are all assigned the value true
    let equal: bool = 1 == 1;
    let not_equal: bool = 1 != 2;
    let greater_than: bool = 2 > 1;
    let less_than: bool = 1 < 2;
    let gte: bool = 2 >= 1;
    let lte: bool = 1 <= 2;

    // if expressions
    let a = if true { "true" } else { "false" };
    let b = is_true { "true" } else { "false" };
    let c = 1 < 2 { "true" } else { "false" };

    fn get_true() -> bool {
        true
    }
    let d = get_true() { "true" } else { "false" };

    fn get_truer(arg1: i64) -> bool {
        arg1 > 5
    }
    let e = get_truer(10) { "true" } else { "false" };

    fn get_more_true(arg1: i64, arg2: i64, arg3: i64) -> bool {
        arg1 + arg2 + arg3 < 10
    }
    let f = get_more_true(1, 2, 3) { "true" } else { "false" }
}
```

</td></tr></table>

### Function definition

<table><tr><th>Toy</th><th>Rust</th></tr><tr><td>

```

// single line functions
// one i64 argument, returns i64
= function_name \ i64 i64 arg1 => + 123 arg1
//                ^       ^       ^_return expression
//                 \       \_ argument names
//                  \_argument types, return type last

// multi line functions
// two i64 arguments, returns i64
= multiline_fn_name \ i64 i64 i64 arg1 arg2 =>
= x + arg1 123
= y - x arg2
= z * y 10

// z is the first expression
// (not an assignment) so it is
// the return value of the function
z


// use parenthesis to pass a function
// as an argument - becomes a &dyn Fn
// first argument in parenthesis defines
// a single argument which is a function
// which takes an i64 and returns an i64
// second argument is an i64
// and function returns an i64
= take_fn_as_first_parameter \ (i64 i64) i64 i64 arg1 arg2 =>

// then the function body calls the
// arg1 with arg2 as the parameter
arg1 arg2

// function calls
function_name 123
multiline_fn_name + 123 456 789

// also when passing a function as a parameter
// must wrap it in parenthesis so it doesn't evaluate
take_fn_as_first_parameter ( function_name ) 321

```

</td><td>

```rust
fn main() {
    // single line functions
    fn function_name(arg1: i64) -> i64 {
        123 + arg1
    }



    // multi line functions
    // two i64 arguments, returns i64
    fn multiline_fn_name(arg1: i64, arg2: i64) -> i64 {
        let x: i64 = arg1 + 123;
        let y: i64 = x - arg2;
        let z: i64 = y * 10;

        // z is the first expression
        // (not an assignment) so it is
        // the return value of the function
        z
    }

    // use parenthesis to pass a function as an argument - becomes a &dyn Fn
    fn take_fn_as_first_parameter(arg1: &dyn Fn(i64) -> i64, arg2: i64) -> i64 {
        arg1(arg2)
    }









    // function calls
    function_name(123);
    multiline_fn_name(123 + 456, 789);
    take_fn_as_first_parameter(&function_name, 321);
}



```

</td></tr></table>

### Lists

<table><tr><th>Toy</th><th>Rust</th></tr><tr><td>

```

// empty Lists
= empty1 [ i64 ]
= empty2 [ f64 ]

// list of Ints
= ints [ 1 2 3 4 5 ]

// list of floats
= floats [ 1.1 2.2 3.3 ]

// list of strings
= strings [ "1" "2" "3" ]

// map
= list [ 1 ]
= mapfn \ i64 i64 i => * i 100
= mapped List.map list ( mapfn )



// append
= list1 [ 1 ]
= list2 [ 2 3 ]
= appended List.append list1 list2

// len
= list [ 1 2 3 ]
= len List.len list

```

</td><td>

```rust
fn main() {
    // empty lists
    let empty1: Vec<i64> = vec![];
    let empty2: Vec<f64> = vec![];

    // list of Ints
    let ints = vec![ 1, 2, 3 ];

    // list of floats
    let floats = vec![ 1.1, 2.2, 3.3];

    // list of strings
    let strings = vec![ "1".to_string(), "2".to_string(), "3".to_string() ];

    // map
    let list: Vec<i64> = vec![ 1 ];
    fn mapfn(i: i64) -> i64 {
        i * 100
    }
    let mapped: Vec<i64> = list.iter().map(mapfn).collect();

    // append
    let list1: Vec<i64> = vec![ 1 ];
    let list2: Vec<i64> = vec![ 2 3 ];
    let appended: Vec<i64> = list1.iter().cloned().chain(list2.iter().cloned()).collect();

    // len
    let list: Vec<i64> = [1, 2, 3];
    let len: i64 = list.len() as i64;
}
```

</td></tr></table>

Commit message:

use clap for args --input --output --debug

README.md, after:

<img align="left" width="80" alt="Toylang" src="./icon.png">
<h1>Toylang</h1>

A toy language which compiles to rust for fun and experimentation.

See also work in progress [VS Code Extension](https://github.com/Swiftaff/toylang-vscode)

## Build

Builds the `'/src/main.rs` into an executable at `/target/debug/toylang.exe` or `/target/release/toylang.exe`

```
cargo build
```

or

```
cargo build --release
```

## Usage

Create a file e.g. `test.toy` containing the toy language in the same directory (or elsewhere).

Pass the required input filepath using the input arg (-i or --input)

Pass the optional output directory using the output arg (-o or --output). Otherwise by default `output.rs` is saved into the current directory.
For development you may wish to output to `src/bin` by convention to make use of `cargo run --bin output` below.

```
toylang -i test.toy
```

or

```
toylang.exe --input ../../somewhere/else/test.toy --output src/bin
```

Compile errors will appear in the console.

```
TOYLANG COMPILE ERROR:
----------
= monkey monkeys
         ^^^^^^^ is not a valid expression: must be either an: integer, e.g. 12345, float, e.g. 123.45, existing constant, e.g. x, string, e.g. "string", function, e.g. + 1 2
----------
= monkey monkeys
^ No valid expression was found
----------
```

Or on success a compiled `output.rs` file will be saved to the output directory.

You can then build THAT file with cargo as needed, i.e. output to `src/bin` and add this to the "Cargo.toml"

```
[[bin]]
name = "output"
```

Then compile and run the output file

```
cargo run --bin output
```

or

```
cargo run --release --bin output
```

And your final compiled `output.exe` will be saved to, and run from `/target/debug` or `/target/release`

## Toy language Syntax Examples

### Hello, world

<table><tr><th>Toy</th><th>Rust</th></tr><tr><td>

```
// print
@ "Hello, world!"
@ 1
@ 1.23


```

</td><td>

```rust
fn main() {
    // print
    println!("{}", "Hello, world!".to_string());
    println!("{}", 1);
    println!("{}", 1.23);
}
```

</td></tr></table>

### Constant assignment

<table><tr><th>Toy</th><th>Rust</th></tr><tr><td>

```

// single line comments
// assign values to constants
= an_integer 123
= a_float 123.45
= a_reference an_integer
= a_string "string"

// basic arithmetic built in functions
= addition + 1 2
= subtraction - 5.4 3.2
= multiplication * 3 4
= division / 1.0 2.0
= modulus % 42.0 3.14

// booleans and equality
= is_true true
= is_false false
// the below constants are all assigned the value true
= equal == 1 1
= not_equal != 1 2
= greater_than > 2 1
= less_than < 1 2
= gte >= 2 1
= lte <= 1 2

// if expressions
= a ? true "true" "false"
= b ? is_true "true" "false"
= c ? < 1 2 "true" "false"

= get_true \ bool => true
= d ? get_true "true" "false"




= get_truer \ i64 bool arg1 => > arg1 5
= e ? get_truer 10 "true" "false"


= get_more_true \ i64 i64 i64 bool arg1 arg2 arg3 =>
  < + arg1 + arg2 arg3 10
= f ? get_more_true 1 2 3 "true" "false"


```

</td><td>

```rust
fn main() {
    // single line comments
    // assign values to constants
    let an_integer: i64 = 123;
    let a_float: f64 = 123.45;
    let a_reference: i64 = an_integer;
    let a_string: String = "string".to_string();

    // basic arithmetic built in functions
    let addition: i64 = 1 + 2;
    let subtraction: f64 = 5.4 - 3.2;
    let multiplication: i64 = 3 * 4;
    let division: f64 = 1.0 / 2.0;
    let modulus: f64 = 42.0 % 3.14;

    // booleans and equality
    let is_true: bool = true;
    let is_false: bool = false;
    // the below constants are all assigned the value true
    let equal: bool = 1 == 1;
    let not_equal: bool = 1 != 2;
    let greater_than: bool = 2 > 1;
    let less_than: bool = 1 < 2;
    let gte: bool = 2 >= 1;
    let lte: bool = 1 <= 2;

    // if expressions
    let a = if true { "true" } else { "false" };
    let b = is_true { "true" } else { "false" };
    let c = 1 < 2 { "true" } else { "false" };

    fn get_true() -> bool {
        true
    }
    let d = get_true() { "true" } else { "false" };

    fn get_truer(arg1: i64) -> bool {
        arg1 > 5
    }
    let e = get_truer(10) { "true" } else { "false" };

    fn get_more_true(arg1: i64, arg2: i64, arg3: i64) -> bool {
        arg1 + arg2 + arg3 < 10
    }
    let f = get_more_true(1, 2, 3) { "true" } else { "false" }
}
```

</td></tr></table>

### Function definition

<table><tr><th>Toy</th><th>Rust</th></tr><tr><td>

```

// single line functions
// one i64 argument, returns i64
= function_name \ i64 i64 arg1 => + 123 arg1
//                ^       ^       ^_return expression
//                 \       \_ argument names
//                  \_argument types, return type last

// multi line functions
// two i64 arguments, returns i64
= multiline_fn_name \ i64 i64 i64 arg1 arg2 =>
= x + arg1 123
= y - x arg2
= z * y 10

// z is the first expression
// (not an assignment) so it is
// the return value of the function
z


// use parenthesis to pass a function
// as an argument - becomes a &dyn Fn
// first argument in parenthesis defines
// a single argument which is a function
// which takes an i64 and returns an i64
// second argument is an i64
// and function returns an i64
= take_fn_as_first_parameter \ (i64 i64) i64 i64 arg1 arg2 =>

// then the function body calls the
// arg1 with arg2 as the parameter
arg1 arg2

// function calls
function_name 123
multiline_fn_name + 123 456 789

// also when passing a function as a parameter
// must wrap it in parenthesis so it doesn't evaluate
take_fn_as_first_parameter ( function_name ) 321

```

</td><td>

```rust
fn main() {
    // single line functions
    fn function_name(arg1: i64) -> i64 {
        123 + arg1
    }



    // multi line functions
    // two i64 arguments, returns i64
    fn multiline_fn_name(arg1: i64, arg2: i64) -> i64 {
        let x: i64 = arg1 + 123;
        let y: i64 = x - arg2;
        let z: i64 = y * 10;

        // z is the first expression
        // (not an assignment) so it is
        // the return value of the function
        z
    }

    // use parenthesis to pass a function as an argument - becomes a &dyn Fn
    fn take_fn_as_first_parameter(arg1: &dyn Fn(i64) -> i64, arg2: i64) -> i64 {
        arg1(arg2)
    }









    // function calls
    function_name(123);
    multiline_fn_name(123 + 456, 789);
    take_fn_as_first_parameter(&function_name, 321);
}



```

</td></tr></table>

### Lists

<table><tr><th>Toy</th><th>Rust</th></tr><tr><td>

```

// empty Lists
= empty1 [ i64 ]
= empty2 [ f64 ]

// list of Ints
= ints [ 1 2 3 4 5 ]

// list of floats
= floats [ 1.1 2.2 3.3 ]

// list of strings
= strings [ "1" "2" "3" ]

// map
= list [ 1 ]
= mapfn \ i64 i64 i => * i 100
= mapped List.map list ( mapfn )



// append
= list1 [ 1 ]
= list2 [ 2 3 ]
= appended List.append list1 list2

// len
= list [ 1 2 3 ]
= len List.len list

```

</td><td>

```rust
fn main() {
    // empty lists
    let empty1: Vec<i64> = vec![];
    let empty2: Vec<f64> = vec![];

    // list of Ints
    let ints = vec![ 1, 2, 3 ];

    // list of floats
    let floats = vec![ 1.1, 2.2, 3.3];

    // list of strings
    let strings = vec![ "1".to_string(), "2".to_string(), "3".to_string() ];

    // map
    let list: Vec<i64> = vec![ 1 ];
    fn mapfn(i: i64) -> i64 {
        i * 100
    }
    let mapped: Vec<i64> = list.iter().map(mapfn).collect();

    // append
    let list1: Vec<i64> = vec![ 1 ];
    let list2: Vec<i64> = vec![ 2 3 ];
    let appended: Vec<i64> = list1.iter().cloned().chain(list2.iter().cloned()).collect();

    // len
    let list: Vec<i64> = [1, 2, 3];
    let len: i64 = list.len() as i64;
}
```

</td></tr></table>
